chore(memory): promote strong-fit messaging drafts from memory-pipeline for review (#120)
medic/cht-agent: agent-memory/domains/messaging/issues/10729-smsparser-bugs-typos.md

title: Fix bugs and typos in smsparser.js and related files
lastUpdated: 2026-07-16
summary: "Fixed two critical bugs in SMS parser: string list iteration bug causing fields to never match, and parseArray crash when def is null. Also fixed typos in code comments."
services:
  - api
  - sentinel
techStack:
  - javascript
  - nodejs
source_prs:
  - "medic/cht-core#10730"
related_issues:
  - cht-core-10802
---

## Problem

The SMS parsing system had two critical bugs affecting message processing:

1. **String list parser bug**: The code used `for (const i of field.list)` which yields array items, not indices. Then it used `field.list[i]` treating `i` as an index, making `item` `undefined`. With the conventional `[[value, label], ...]` list shape the very next line, `item[0] === cleaned`, therefore threw `TypeError: Cannot read properties of undefined (reading '0')`, which propagated out of `smsparser.parse` uncaught — the loop crashed rather than falling through to the "Option not available" warning. That warning was effectively unreachable: it required `field.list` to be empty (or to hold entries that coincidentally stringify to valid indices).

> 2. **parseArray null crash**: The function called `getParser(def, doc)` before checking if `def` was null. When `def` is null/undefined, `getParser()` returns `undefined`, and calling `parser(def, doc)` threw `TypeError: parser is not a function`, crashing the SMS parsing process.

Reviewer: issue (blocking): the mechanism is over-broad, and the draft's own Testing section already refutes it: line 75 correctly notes that `getParser(null, doc)` returned `textformsParser.parse` for the junk-data spec case. `getParser` returns `undefined` only for a non-string `doc.message` (smsparser.js:76-78) or an unrecognized Muvuku format code (:86-87), not merely because `def` is null.

```suggestion
2. **parseArray null crash**: `parseArray` called `getParser(def, doc)` and invoked the returned parser before its `if (!def || !def.fields) return []` guard ran. For message shapes where `getParser` returns `undefined` (a non-string `doc.message`, or an unrecognized Muvuku format code), `parser(def, doc)` threw `TypeError: parser is not a function` before the guard could return. `getParser` does not return `undefined` merely because `def` is null; for an ordinary text message it returns `textformsParser.parse`.
```

- api/src/services/report/smsparser.js
- api/src/controllers/infodoc.js
- sentinel/src/schedule/reminders.js
- api/tests/mocha/services/report/smsparser.spec.js (existing spec; not modified by #10730)

## Testing

> - PR #10730 (393b9d6a) touched no test files, and neither fix is covered by existing tests. In `api/tests/mocha/services/report/smsparser.spec.js` every `list:` fixture (lines 483, 490, 508, 527, 568) is on a `type: 'integer'` field, so the `string` list branch is untested; and the only `parseArray(null, doc)` case ('junk example data', line 1339) never reached the crash because `getParser(null, doc)` returns `textformsParser.parse` for that message. Note the spec path is `api/tests/mocha/services/report/smsparser.spec.js` — there is no `smsparser.js` under that directory.

Reviewer: issue: Design Choices (line 62) still claims 'Existing unit tests already covered the functionality', which this grounded Testing section contradicts ('neither fix is covered by existing tests'). Line 62 sits outside this diff; please delete that bullet.
